The province of Río Negro is part of the two
thirds of arid and semi-arid territory present in Argentina. The
hydrology, topography, geomorphology and other factors, such as low rainfall
and markedly seasonal and fluctuating temperatures, determine the type and
spatial distribution of the vegetation (Bisigato et al. 2009; Fernández
et al. 2017). From the phytogeographic point of view, the
north of Río Negro is part of the southern sector
of the Phytogeographic Province of Monte (Cabrera 1976; Morrone 2014;
Fernández et al. 2017; Oyarzabal et al. 2018). The plant
communities that characterize the plateau sector of this region are
xerophytic shrub species, aphyllous, with photosynthesizing stems, spiny, or with
small deciduous or perennial leaves, and sometimes with waxes or
resins on the leaves and stems. Species of the genus
Larrea Cav. (“jarilla” - L. divaricata Cav., L. cuneifolia Cav.
and L. nítida Cav.), of the Zygophyllaceae family, are dominant.
The extensive “jarillales” (low scrubland) are associated with plants from
different families, such as the Anacardiaceae, Asteraceae, Fabaceae, Solanaceae, Verbenaceae,
or halophyte species, such as Atriplex L. and Suaeda Forssk.
ex J.F.Gmel. (Chenopodiaceae), among others. Also, smaller clumps of “chilladora”
(Chuquiraga erinacea D.Don, Asteraceae), “mata cebo” (Monttea aphylla (Miers) Benth.
& Hook., Scrophulariaceae) and “chañar” (Geoffroea decorticans (Gillies ex Hook.
& Arn.) Burkart, Fabaceae) are frequent, as well as cacti
and various species of annual and perennial herbs, that are
protected by their association with patches of shrubs. Some species
of grass and / or dicotyledonous herbs become established in
the interpatches. The grass species that dominate the herbaceous stratum
belong to the genera of Jarava Ruíz & Pav., Nassella
Desv. and Poa L. (Cabrera 1976; Walter 1977; Soriano &
Sala 1983; León et al. 1998, Oyarzabal et al. 2018).
Salix humboltiana Willd. is characteristic on the banks of the
river Rio Negro and also several exotic species of Asteraceae,
Brassicaceae, Chenopodiaceae, Fabaceae, Salicaceae, etc. are common, as well as
introduced shrubs, such as Elaeagnus angustifolia L. (Elaeagnaceeae), Tamarix ramosissima
Ledeb. (Tamaricaceae), Rosa rubiginosa L. (Rosaceae) (Klich 2016).