This study investigates the presence of a relationship between the
foreign exchange rate, which has devastating effects when not taken
under control, and femicide in Turkey, which has a chronic
current account deficit and is dependent on short-term foreign capital.
Current and advanced empirical analysis will be used in the
study. Before investigating femicide in terms of economy, it would
be appropriate to explain why the foreign exchange rate was
selected by describing its effects on individuals. A foreign exchange
rate is a crucial tool applied in Orthodox anti-inflationary stabilization
programs. Its effects are not limited to international trade and
capital flows. The policies implemented by the central banks and
political authorities, whose primary purpose is to protect the national
currency's value, affect all areas of life, starting with the
economy. The foreign exchange rate policies implemented in Turkey are
observed to be a significant cause of economic crises. There
is a linear relationship between the exchange rate, foreign trade,
and unemployment13. Besides, the foreign exchange rate affects the labor
market through imports and exports14. An increase in imports can
affect the relationship between the employer and employee, thereby leading
to the termination or change of various rights and regulations
regarding wages, labor and working conditions against the employees. Studies
reveal that a 10% increase in competition between imported and
domestic goods leads to a 1.6% decrease in wages and
increases the unemployment rate15. In addition, it is clear that
currency crises have a significant impact on the unemployment phenomenon.
For instance, both the foreign exchange rate and unemployment level
increased in Mexico during the 1994 Crisis. In the 1997
Asian Crisis, the currency crisis in South Korea led to
both unemployment and inflation16. Turkey experienced a process starting with
the 1978 crisis, and particularly with the crisis created by
the threat of unemployment after 1990. Since the establishment of
the Republic, there have been five serious crises (1929-32, 1958-61,
1978-83, 1998-2001, and 2008). Before the crises, there have been
increases in current account deficits. In 1977, 1987, 1990, 1993,
1997, 2000, and 2008, despite the fact that the external
value of the national currency should have been corrected against
the ongoing inflation problem, it was not reduced. Or, the
external value of the national currency was increased. All these
were the factors that increased the current account deficit. Currency
explosions constituted the main factor that triggered the crises. In
addition to inflation, the current account deficit is the leading
cause of crises. Unemployment replaced inflation in the 2008 Global
Financial Crisis17. The fluctuations of the foreign exchange rate were
empirically presented in the study conducted for Turkey by Demir
(2009)18 regarding its negative effect on employment.