The interviewee selection criterion springs from a non-probability sample design
by purpose, based on accessibility and feasibility (Strauss and Corvin
2002), through the sampling technique called chain- referral sampling or
snowball sampling2. An instrument was designed to conduct semi-structured interviews.
These interviews were carried out in the workplaces and the
places of residence of the members of the Network, and
also during the meetings held by Network members. In certain
cases, several meetings with the same professional were agreed on,
with the purpose of expanding the data collection. Each meeting
and interview lasted 40 minutes on average. Interview recording and
transcription were carried out for the analytical work. So as
to complement the data obtained, civil society and women’s organization
leaders were interviewed and documents produced and distributed by the
Network and other organizations were revised, particularly those by the
“Campaña Nacional por el Derecho al Aborto Legal, Seguro y
Gratuito” (National Campaign for the Right to Legal, Safe and
Free Abortion), “Católicas por el derecho a decidir-Córdoba” (Catholics for
the Right to Decide- Córdoba) and “Socorristas en Red” (Women
Rescuers Network). All interviewees took part in the formation of
the Network. A total of 5 additional interviews were conducted
with representatives of these organizations. The research project obtained the
approval of the Ethics Committee of the Hospital Nacional de
Clínicas (National Hospital of Clinics) of the city of Córdoba,
Argentina. Each interviewee was requested to grant a verbal informed
consent while the study’s scientific objectives were specified, and identity
confidentiality was guaranteed. All the participants are healthcare professionals and
activists that work for women’s sexual and reproductive rights, they
are of legal age, and they gave their consent to
be part of the study. Before starting each interview I
read the informed consent, which included the goals of the
research, and the assurance that they would be fully anonymized.
They were also informed that their participation was voluntary and
that they could interrupt the interview whenever they wanted. Their
personal data will only be available for the responsible researcher.
All names haven been changed, and it is not possible
to identify those interviewed. These remarks and their consent are
registered in the recordings of the interviews.