Eleven days after hospital discharge (afebrile for more than 1
week), the patient was readmitted due to a 2-day history
of fever, acute-onset right-sided back pain, and respiratory discomfort. His
SpO2 was 93% on room air and >95% after oxygen
supplementation (1L/min) by nasal catheter. On examination, he was afebrile,
with a heart rate of 113 beats/min, blood pressure of
136/85 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min. The thoracic
auscultation indicated bilaterally reduced vesicular murmur with bibasilar crackles. Repeat
non-enhanced chest CT showed an increase in the extent of
bilateral and multilobar lung involvement by predominantly peripheral multifocal opacities,
along with consolidation, and development of sub-pleural lines and newer
ground-glass opacities (Figure 1B). A newly developed right- sided laminar
pleural effusion was observed. An increase in the heart volume
and pulmonary trunk diameter relative to the initial CT examination
drew attention. The Wells score for PE was <2 points.
The patient’s WBC count was 11090/mm3 (neutrophils, 8320/mm3; lymphocytes, 1600/mm3;
monocytes, 1090/mm3), hemoglobin level was 13.9 g/dL, platelet count was
296000/mm3, serum D-dimer level was 2317 ng/mL Fibrinogen Equivalent Units
(FEU; upper limit of normal, 500 ng/mL FEU), troponin I
level was normal (<0.16 ng/mL), C-reaction protein level was 5.08
mg/dL (reference value, <1.00 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase level was 613
U/L (upper limit of normal, 480 U/L), prothrombin time was
14.2 s (reference range, 10.1–12.8 s), and activated partial thromboplastin
time was 28.9 s (reference range, 25.4–33.4 s). A repeat
rRT-PCR of nasopharyngeal swab tested positive for the SARS-CoV-2 nucleic
acid. The patient underwent a transthoracic echocardiography that revealed normal
findings. Since the right- sided back pain persisted on the
second day of rehospitalization, CT pulmonary angiography was performed. It
showed filling defects in sub-segmental arterial branches of the posterior
basal segment of the right lower lobe, consistent with acute
PE (Figure 1C and Figure 1D). Additionally, the peripheral lung
opacity with reversed halo sign and central lucencies, compatible with
pulmonary infarction, could be detected in this examination (Figure 1E).
Dual- energy CT color-coded iodine “perfusion” map revealed only a
focal iodine defect in the posterior basal segment of the
right lower lobe, where the pulmonary infarction was detected (Figure
1F). The lupus anticoagulant testing was found positive. The patient
was treated with a full-dose anticoagulant drug (subcutaneous enoxaparin) and
antibiotics (azithromycin and piperacillin/tazobactam). He showed clinical and laboratory improvement,
and was discharged in good general condition after 4 days
of full anticoagulation, with rivaroxaban prescribed for home use.