Arena 3: Triatomine responses to an odorous air current were
tested in a Y-tube dual choice olfactometer made of glass
(Fig 1C). The three Belminus species were tested separately against
volatiles emanating from 1) living cockroaches, 2) cockroach feces, and
3) mouse feces. One triatomine bug was allowed to a)
walk upwind in the stem (length 22 cm, i.d. 2.370
cm, e.d 2.804 cm), and once it reached the junction,
b) made a choice between the two arms (length 13
cm) of the Y-olfactometer. Orientation was quantified by recording triatomines’
choice. All individuals walked from the base of the Y
olfactometer and made a decision. A preliminary spatial control experiment
with two clean arms was performed to test asymmetries, and
no significant differences were found. A pump was used to
draw charcoal-filtered air (stimulus controller, CS- 55, Syntech) from the
two arms (10 ± 2 cm/s airspeed as measured by
a hot-wire anemometer, 2440, Kurtz, accuracy ± 0.01 m/s), one
of which was connected to a 500 ml glass gas-wash
bottle containing the odor source; the other one held a
similar clean (control) bottle. Both air- streams reached the ‘‘Y’’
stem (23± 2 °C and 70 % RH as measured
by a thermo-hygrometer, EA80, Extech Instruments, accuracy ± 3% RH
and ± 1 °C). Tubes, fittings and valves were made
of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE, International Polymer Solutions Inc). Headspace odors –i.e.
volatiles emanating from the vapor phase above the sample in
a vial– were tested by placing the odorous samples (see
next section) in 500 ml glass gas-wash bottles. Bottles were
left to equilibrate for at least 10 min before blowing
volatiles, and an additional 15 minutes elapsed between experiments so
cockroaches and wastes had time to emit more volatiles. Air
blown over filter paper and rice hulls dampened with 5
ml of water served as controls for cockroach feces and
mouse wastes respectively. The control for cockroaches consisted of a
clean gas-wash bottle with a similar wet filter paper. Water
served to add humidity to match the humidity produced by
organic samples (Otálora-Luna and Guerin 2014). The air-stream passing through
the bottles was injected at 150 ml/min. Bugs walking on
the Y-olfactometer were stimulated until a response was observed, <
30 min. Flask positions were interchanged for every insect. The
Y- olfactomenter was cleaned before changing positions. In order to
test for asymmetries in the experimental setup Belminus bugs were
observed in an odorless control trial, where two empty bottles
were tested. In order to remove odors from the laboratory
the experimental setup was positioned near an exhaust hood, which
was able to exchange the air in the room 15
times per hour. Mouse waste was not tested on B.
herreri as this colony was not large enough to provide
an adequate number of naïve individuals.