Phase I: B. ferroae nymphs walked along the border (sidewall)
of the 10-cm dish; showing positive thigmotaxis (Fig 1A). The
bugs hardly ever edged the 5-cm dish, which contained the
cockroach (two bugs, each on one occasion). Most bugs depicted
a swinging walk along the perimeter of the former dish,
alternating between clockwise and counterclockwise directions. This to-and-fro circuit approximated
and rarely exceeded 180°. Triatomine walking bouts were not continuous
but were punctuated by stops, which comprised 20% of the
time. The cockroach showed several attempts to escape by moving
into the confined space, occasionally ramming against the sidewall of
the dish. There were no obvious sings of interaction between
the triatomine and the cockroach despite their proximity. Phase II:
Shortly after being released the cockroach moved profusely and showed
positive thigmotaxis; although walking tracks were discontinuous ―punctuated by stops.
The bug interrupted the positive thigmotactic behavior and remained motionless
for 5 seconds. Then the bug faced the cockroach and
lifted the anterior part of its body (~40°) through an
extension of its forelegs in order to reach higher with
its antennae held up (~60° with respect to ground), a
behavior referred to here as reaching. The bug continuously waved
its antennae (i.e., semaphore movement, ~30°). Eventually, when the cockroach
came to a halt, the bug stopped reaching and walked
very cautiously to the cockroach (Fig 1B) by bending down
the anterior part of its body through flexing of their
forelegs (i.e., stalking). Thus, the triatomine walking velocity decreased substantially
compared to the previous phase. The bug approached the abdomen
of the cockroach and touched it with its antennas (i.e.,
antennal exploration). Then the bug extended the proboscis, pierced the
cockroach abdomen briefly (~2 seconds), and finally walked away. Proboscis
flexibility allowed the bug to pierce the cockroach from below
(Fig 1Ca). After 10 seconds of being pierced, the cockroach
experienced alternating spasms with slow, clumsy and erratic movements. The
cockroach displayed obvious sings of disorientation. In such condition, the
cockroach did not show positive thigmotaxis but rather slow wide-ranging
movements. The occasion was seized to approach the cockroach in
the same manner as before –the triatomine bug walked cautiously
and eventually inserted the stylets. This time the bug sucked
cockroach hemolymph for 2 minutes; repeating this kleptophagic behavior on
two or more occasions. The triatomine abdomen swelled prominently. Summarizing
the description of Belminus’ FAP we categorized the following stereotyped
behaviors: 1) visual and/or olfactory detection of the cockroach, 2)
reaching, 3) cautious approach, 4) antennal exploration, 5) extension of
the proboscis, 3) piercing to sedate, 5) walking away and
waiting (post sedation behavior), 6) second cautious approach, 7) extension
of the proboscis, 8) piercing to suck hemolymph. The sequences
6-8 were repeated more than once. The cockroach did not
die.