The feeding FAP observed here is derived from an ancestral
pattern of hemipterans. Hatfield et al. (1983) described similar sequential
behaviors associated with feeding in the phytophagous bug Lygus lineolaris
(Hemiptera: Miridae). Haridass et al. (1987) distinguish a series of
categories where reduviids can be grouped based on their approaching
behaviors during feeding: (i) 'blood feeding' type, (ii) 'sticky-trap' type,
(iii) 'raptorial' type, (iv) 'wait and grab' type, (v) 'pin
and jab' type and (vi) 'chase and pounce' type. Reduviid
predators exhibit an “assessing” and “ambush” strategy (Edwards 1962, Ables
1978), which is different from the FAP described for Belminus
vis à vis the way the victim is handled. A
typical member of the Harpactocorinae sits "pinned” and waits for
a prey to arrive on a flower to “jab” it
(Haridass et al. 1988, Ambrose 1999). Edwards (1962) described the
feeding FAP for the harpactocorine Rhinocoris carmelita and the reduviine
Platymeris rhadamanthus as follow: arousal, orientation, fixation, approach, (facultative) pounce,
extension of rostrum, grasping, apprehension, insertion of styletes and injection
of saliva. Srikumar et al. (2014) described the feeding FAP
for harpactorine reduviid predators as follow: arousal, approach, capture, rostral
thrust, paralyzing, sucking, and post- predatory behaviors. Other authors have
described similar behavioral sequences in Reduviidae (Ables 1978, Haridass and
Ananthakrishnan 1980). Ables (1978) observed that “smaller, more mobile prey
are usually ‘ambushed’, whereas larger, less mobile prey are ‘stalked’”
and “when prey were detected the predator became motionless with
the fore tibiae raised and the antennae extended.” This author
added that “initial contact with prey usually consisted of antennation
and then insertion of the predator's proboscis”. According to Srikumar
et al. (2014) “after prey were pinned and jabbed, the
reduviids paralyzed them by injecting toxic saliva”. Some reduviid species
transport the prey beneath leaves and twigs to a safe
and secluded place before sucking out its body fluids (Srikumar
et al. 2014). Sometimes they grip it with the fore
and mid-legs until the victim succumbs (Edwards 1962).