Transmission of some viruses in buildings can be limited by
changing air temperature and humidity levels. In isolation rooms, the
vents are located at the bottom, and airflow is tightly
controlled, so air is prevented from "spilling over" into other
spaces. It has been found that when it comes to
air-conditioned rooms, low values of humidity and temperature can allow
respiratory illnesses such as COVID-19 to continue to survive. Such
small virus particles stay airborne and can travel long distances
carried by airflows in the rooms or in the bathrooms.
For example, high-risk immunocompromised patients are often kept within Protective
Environment (PE) rooms, designed to limit outside airborne infectious agents
from entering into the room. To do this, these rooms
are positively pressurized, relative to the corridor space, with a
minimum of HEPA supply air [18]. However, this pressurization differential
also increases the likelihood that aerosols in the patient room
will migrate outside of the PE room and into the
higher traffic corridor space when the door is open. While
PE rooms typically function as intended for the occupant, if
an immunocompromised patient is also under treatment for an airborne
infectious disease, the process of limiting pathogen ingress into the
room could potentially create involuntary exposure to health care workers,
other patients, and visitors via the corridor space. In comparison,
Airborne Infection Isolation (AII) rooms utilize a negative pressure differential
relative to the corridor space and adjacent rooms, directly exhausting
room air to the exterior of the building to contain
aerosolized pathogens from spreading into circulation and shared spaces. The
same negative pressure that aids in preventing spread of aerosolized
pathogens from inside the room, can involuntarily expose the room
occupants to airborne pathogens that are sourced from occupants of
the corridor space. Both PE and AII rooms may be
designed with an anteroom that is used as an additional
buffer between common areas and protected spaces to prevent pathogen
spread and provide a location for hospital staff to apply
and remove personal protection equipment (PPE). Although contact with contaminated
surfaces or people is the biggest source of infection, the
aerosol is also a source of contamination where masks may
not be sufficient to eliminate contamination. In addition, toilets during
flushing can also be a contamination source, therefore, REHVA states
that 2 meters away and wearing masks is not enough
to protect from infection of Corona Virus SARS-CoV-2. That actions,
such as increasing ventilation, is useful to remove additional particles
[14].