In contrast to studies that analyze stigma at an individual
level, occupational stigma unfolds when it befalls the job done
and it affects workers. Workers are perceived as people who
have voluntarily chosen their jobs, therefore it would be a
“controllable” stigma (Kreiner, Ashforth y Sluss 2006, p.619). In various
contexts, the medical profession has acquired the status of a
reference point, a status which is built and maintained thanks
to the accumulation of a strong symbolic capital over the
years. This capital may be affected with the disclosure of
news that link the medical professional to the practice of
abortion. As O’Donnell claims, the fear of stigma also affects
professionals working in a peri- abortion situation, which encompasses people
who take part in the abortion itinerary but are not
directly involved in the practice itself, such as social workers
and other people responsible for counselling tasks, ultrasounds or the
patient’s recovery stage (O’Donnell, Weitz, Freedman 2011). In this context,
to be accused, by one’s own peers, as “abortionist” carries
a weight and a discredit that disturb professionals. In addition,
the family constitutes another front with respect to which professionals
also worry about safeguarding the accumulated “symbolic capital” (Drovetta 2015a).
The stigma of abortion manifests itself, among other ways, through
the low prestige associated with the applicability assigned to the
medical knowledge learned in school. As O’Donnell shows, workers linked
to the practice of abortion are described according to the
stereotype of being “morally deficient, profit-motivated, and/or technically incompetent ‘back-alley’
physicians” (O’Donnell, Weitz, Freedman 2011, p.1358). Therefore, a stigmatized group
may be defined as “one whose identity or image calls
into question the full humanity of its members; in the
eyes of others, the stigmatized group and its members are
spoiled, blemished, devalued, or flawed to various degrees” (Kreiner, Ashforth
y Sluss 2006, p.620).