By this time, with the publication of JIF 2019 by
JCR, which called the attention of editors and authors who
were eager to see how journals were ranked, passionate discussions
arose because of Zootaxa’s suppression. A prompt reaction, hardly seen
before, through many letters of support to Zootaxa and petitions
from several societies and researchers, forced Clarivate to review its
decision. We believe that suppression of Zootaxa entails so many
unique elements that it needs a closer inspection. Some supporting
letters could actually be considered political manifestos and others were
very naïve, not to say alarmist or simply inaccurate in
interpreting the fact as a new attack to taxonomy as
a science. Among the utterly passionate arguments was the one
that Zootaxa is the single vehicle to publish taxonomic papers
nowadays, a statement obviously far away from the truth. At
the end of July, in a short statement on Twitter,
Clarivate announced that Zootaxa and the International Journal of Systematic
and Evolutionary Microbiology would be reconsidered in the regular refresh
of the JCR to be published in September. Cases of
suppression are common and not unique to the Clarivate platform,
being most of them due to accusations of artificial boost
or inflation of impact factors (e.g., Cortegiani et al. 2020).
A particular case, almost a decade ago, had a wide
repercussion among researchers when four journals edited in Brazil were
suppressed under accusation of a citation-stacking scheme, a sort of
cartel in which self-citations are exchanged among a group of
journals (Van Norden 2013). Noticeably, cases of suppression in the
past hardly received any sympathy from the scientific community, except
from people directly involved as editors, perhaps as a signal
that sectors of the academic community agreed with the suppression
and considered that the affected journals deserved such “punishment.” Once
discarded from JIF, a journal is excluded from the gold
rush of academia targeting high-impact outlets.