With this in mind, I should note that the claim
that RE syllabuses, according to the neutralist liberal conception, should
aim at covering as many religions as possible, and prioritise
breath over depth, overlooks the experiential dimension of cognitive knowledge.
As Ninian Smart (1968, p. 93-94) has underscored, as with
the study of philosophy or sciences, one cannot grasp the
reasons informing the development of different religious systems of belief
without engaging with their contents as in a personal quest.
Smart contends that the arid enunciation of Plato’s teaching, for
instance, would be sterile without the dialogical attitude by which
one raises objections, establishes connections and reinterprets his propositions according
to some particular concerns. Similarly, the history of sciences should
be capable of showing the specific reasons why new methods
and conceptions were formulated to rectify past paradigms and improve
old techniques. Hence, it is not difficult to conclude that
RE is more effective as a discipline when it fosters
that attitude of engagement whereby the contents of religious topics
find correspondence within the life, activities and aspirations of each
believer. What is important to highlight is that each of
these disciplines, even when presented in the form of a
historical overview, connects cultural experiences and scientific knowledge, since the
contents of the syllabuses draw on particular narratives, referring to
a determined space-temporal cut, which defines what is relevant to
the social and political life of that particular society. Hence,
if philosophy classes in Western societies tend to dedicate more
time to the study of Plato, Kant or Mill, in
contrast with Eastern schools such as Confucianism or Daoism, it
is probably because the former had a greater impact for
the shaping of social and political practices in those societies.
This does not need to entail a static perception of
knowledge, as the pluralisation of Western societies may lead educationalists
to develop a greater interest in the philosophies of the
East. However, in order to enhance the possibilities for the
understanding of alien cultural and intellectual standards of thinking, a
practical appreciation of activities, attitudes and lifestyles that inform those
philosophies is necessary. It would be interesting, for instance, to
compare Western principles of individual freedom to Eastern views about
the collective life, as well as the impact of those
for conceptions of rights and justice. This may be especially
valid for the consideration of struggles between some children and
parents from an Asian background regarding the choice of a
spouse2. In any case, the more one can draw on
the experiences of pupils of different backgrounds, the more the
orientation for mutual learning can be effective.