Undeniably, exploring biodiversity is a core issue for the entire
biological sciences (and humanity). In this context, taxonomic research is
an essential priority in face of the current biodiversity crisis
(Wheeler et al. 2012). The concept of taxonomy in biological
sciences has a wide range of meanings, varying from the
reductionist, atomized, and merely descriptive harmful view known as alpha
taxonomy (e.g., Mayr 1969) — largely denoted as a minor
science, old fashioned and intellectually poor — to a wide
sense of taxonomy as the biggest among all biological sciences
(e.g., Wheeler 2008), equivalent to the whole field of comparative
biology. This wider view, which is adopted here, embraces from
primary data acquisition in field expeditions to morphological, genomic, and
even ecosystem analyses. Thus, it considers taxonomy as a relevant
hypothesis‐driven science. However, ordinary taxonomic research executed day-by-day is a
generally low-cost activity that employs few technological tools. It is
focused on the study of natural history collections with the
goal of characterizing and making available basic data on biological
entities. This work often involves the study of the morphology
of poorly known taxa, an unknown sex of a given
species or developmental stages, as well as undescribed taxa. Taxonomists
must frequently work with poorly known subjects, looking for the
novelty, odd, and thus dealing with unpopular or even neglected
topics. Therefore, there are many cases of fine, well-written and
beautifully fully illustrated comprehensive taxonomic monographs on animal groups that
will probably rarely be cited. The small number of citations
might even be related to the fact that such monographs
successfully solve most of the basic taxonomic questions affecting one
taxon. One colorful example was mentioned during the Brazilian Congress
of Zoology in 2014. A colleague entomologist raised a simple
question: “I am studying one of the smallest orders of
insects (Zoraptera, the angel insects) with no more than four
dozens of extant species, so what is the chance of
citation, within only two years, of a paper that provides
a great contribution on this group, including the description of
new species?” Problems with the low rate of citations in
taxonomy are widely discussed and the inadequacy of JIF for
basic sciences is often mentioned (e.g., Krell 2000, Rafael et
al. 2009). This is a paradox caused by the fact
that taxonomy must, in part, necessarily deal with basic descriptive
subjects, the new and unexpected, focusing on small parts of
the tree of life.