Since its establishment, Zootaxa has become a prestigious forum for
promotion and discussion of all topics of taxonomic science and
thus reached a distinguished position among other similar journals. Unquestionably,
the birth of the journal was a milestone to the
field of zoological taxonomy. Started in 2001 with a hybrid
platform of publication (i.e., the payment of Article Processing Charges
– APC by authors is optional for making the paper
Open Access – OA), when 300 pages were published, the
journal increased to 32,330 pages in 2010 (Zhang 2011) and
ended 2019 with the impressive record of 47,528 pages; the
latter comprising 2,400 papers in 176 volumes (data compiled from
Zootaxa’s site). In its first decade, Zootaxa has made available
about 20–25% of the new nomina per year (Zhang 2014).
In the last five years, it has become the main
journal, truly the leader in the field of descriptive taxonomy,
with 24,722 (26.57% of the total) newly erected taxa made
available (ION/Zoological RecordsTM 2020). Despite its few years of existence,
the journal has received remarkable status and visibility. Papers published
in it have potentially higher chances of being cited by
fellow taxonomists, unlike the situation in many other similar journals
in the field that clearly have a lower visibility. Zootaxa
has been the first choice for a legion of young
taxonomists for their very first papers. The relatively high JIF
of the journal is certainly among the reasons for this
choice. Furthermore, for those zoologists who are not primarily taxonomists
but who eventually decide to publish a taxonomic paper, the
journal is also probably the first choice, if not the
single one known. Indeed, Zootaxa is so influential nowadays that
a somewhat pejorative term, “Zootaxa author,” has been coined, meaning
those researchers who only publish in the journal or have
a massive amount of their papers in it, reaching 80%
or more. Why this phenomenon? Why does a journal congregate
such a huge parcel of publications in a field? Is
this situation actually good for taxonomy?