We explored citation data including JIF, most-cited journals, and self-citation
metrics from the Journal Citation Reports (Web of Science Core
Collection™) of the last nine years (2010–2018) of the top
ten zoological journals (TTJ, eight are included in JCR) when
the number of new available names (based on the last
five years of ION/Zoological RecordsTM – ZR) is considered. We
also checked up for journals focused on or regularly publishing
taxonomic papers included in the Zoology and Entomology categories. Data
from Zootaxa were retrieved from JCR 2018 because this journal
was suppressed from the current edition and will only reappear
in September. Journals included in both Zoology and Entomology categories
were considered simply as Zoology. Among 168 journals in Zoology
and 101 in Entomology, 73 and 48 (both numbers include
“plus” Zootaxa) were selected. Data of a total of 123
journals were compiled. In order to analyze the selected journals
with available data from 2010–2018, a descriptive statistics approach including
arithmetic mean of the bibliometric variables, their standard deviations, and
the ratio between JIF without self-citations and JIF was used
to investigate the influence of self-citations on JIF. This approach
was conducted among the top ten journals (TTJ) in ZR
and those in Zoology and Entomology categories. The percentage of
self-citations and the ratio between JIF without self-citations and JIF
per year of the journals between quartiles 2 and 3
(Q2 and Q3) in their categories plus TTJ were analyzed
with non-parametric one- way analysis of variance Kruskal–Wallis H test
(Dalgaard 2008) in R software (R Core Team 2018). Thus,
journals with similar scope and JIF to Zootaxa were considered.
In practice, all journals publishing taxonomic papers with JIF 2019
ranging from 0.25–2.315 in the categories Zoology and Entomology were
included. This last criterion can be considered arbitrary because the
proportion of taxonomic papers is dissimilar among the journals. Clearly,
Zootaxa and ZooKeys, for example, have a greater amount of
taxonomic papers, even when the fact that these journals accept
studies on different subjects of biological sciences is considered. However,
for the purposes of our discussion it is reasonable to
consider such journals as similar in scope. The comparison is
not easy because the original scope of Zootaxa is unique,
due to its intent of “rapid publication of high-quality papers
on any aspect of systematic zoology” and its focus on
long papers. However, Zootaxa publishes today virtually any subject associated
to zoological taxonomy/systematics, including biographies and points of view on
theoretical subjects. Therefore, it is fair to conclude that all
kinds of zoological papers are published in that journal, except
those essentially dealing with ecological or experimental issues. The list
of the journals and selected metrics are available in Table
1 and Supplementary File 1. Note that the categorization of
journals follows Web of Science’s rules, so that many taxonomic
journals that publish studies in the areas of zoology or
entomology have not been included because they are listed in
any other of 178 categories in the Science Edition database.