Our results are summarized in Figure 1 and Table 1.
In addition, complete information of the records from each database
described here can be found in the Supplementary Information associated
with this publication (Romero & Castillo, 2020). We found 817
694 records associated with the term “Peru'' in the Nucleotide
database (Table 1). However, this number could be an overestimate
of Peruvian sequences in this database. For instance, we found
some records that corresponded to the Spanish institution Estacion Biológica
de Donana, because the building where it is located is
named “Pabellon del Peru”. Thus, to be consistent with the
previous report from Norena et al. (2018), we only focused
on submissions by Peruvian institutions. Therefore, we found 14 488
sequences (1.77% of the records related to the term “Peru”)
submitted by 36 Peruvian institutions (Suppl. Inf. 2). 11 institutions
submitted more than 100 records to this database (Fig. 1).
Public institutions such as Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS), Universidad
Nacional Mayor de San Marcos (UNMSM), Instituto Nacional de Investigación
Agraria (INIA), and Instituto de Investigaciones de la Amazonía Peruana
(IIAP), and private institutions such as Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia
(UPCH) and Farmacéuticos Veterinarios S. A. C. (FARVET) submitted most
of the records. In BioProject, we found 193 records related
to the term “Peru” (Suppl. Inf. 3), 59 of them
were submitted by 9 Peruvian institutions (Fig. 1). INS has
most of the records, followed by UNMSM, Universidad Nacional Agraria
La Molina (UNALM) and UPCH. In PATRIC, we found 2
959 records (Suppl. Inf. 4), 107 of them submitted by
8 Peruvian institutions (Fig. 1). Similarly, most of the records
were submitted by UPCH, INS, and UNMSM. Finally, in BOLD,
we found 23 968 public records associated to the term
“Peru”. From these, 8 249 were mined from Genbank so
to avoid counting them twice, we discarded them in the
final count. We found that 3 754 records were submitted
by 11 Peruvian institutions (Suppl. Inf. 5). Most of the
sequences were produced by the Centro de Ornitología y Biodiversidad
(CORBIDI), UNMSM (mainly, from the Museo de Historia Natural), UNALM
(mainly, from the Herbarium), the Instituto del Mar del Perú
(IMARPE), and the Servicio Nacional de Sanidad Agraria del Perú
(SENASA).