Triatomines are a coherent taxonomic group among reduviids (Schaefer 2005).
They are classified into 5 tribes and 15 genera including
about 150 described species, most of which occur exclusively in
America (Otálora-Luna et al. 2015). Triatomines exhibit behavioral and morphological
features which distinguish them from most Reduviidae (or assassin bugs).
Triatomines are unusual among Reduviidae because they are structurally adapted
to hematophagy; although, not all are strict blood-sucking species, as
we will show later. Reduviids are themselves an unusual family
of the large order Hemiptera (or true bugs). Reduviids are
unusual among the Hemiptera because almost all are terrestrial predators
of other arthropods – most other predatory Hemiptera are aquatic.
It is widely accepted that triatomines derived or evolved from
primitive zoophagous reduviids (Cobben 1979). However, there is controversy over
whether this occurred once (monophyletic hypothesis) or more times (polyphyletic
hypothesis) during evolution (Otálora-Luna et al. 2015). Schaefer (2005) strongly
suggested that we can learn about the subfamily Triatominae by
knowing such phylogenetic relationships. According to this author there is
enough consistence between behavioral, physiological and morphological features around triatomines’
way of life to consider them a monophyletic or paraphyletic
(i.e., a natural) group. However, taxonomists of Triatominae have drawn
more attention to morphological traits than to behavioral patterns (Lent
and Wygodzinsky 1979, Páez- Rondón et al. 2019). In some
cases taxonomic groups are indistinguishable in terms of their morphological
features (Hutchinson 1965), but even the most morphologically similar species
have distinguishable differences in their habits (Imanishi 2011). According to
Imanishi, ethological studies might serve to distinguish taxonomic groups. Although,
behavior is not an ordinary phenotypic attribute as not all
behavioral traits are heritable, an important portion of behavior, i.e.
instincts, can be considered part of triatomine phenotype and can
be accurately measured if observational conditions are controlled following ethological
precepts. According to Lorenz (1966) “coordination of movements” or “phylogenetically
adapted motor patterns” characterize species and the concept of homology
can be applied to them just as well as morphological
descriptions. The approach followed in this study has departed from
the mentioned ethological premises. We aim to learn about the
subfamily Triatominae by describing behavioral characters as indicators of phylogenetic
relationships. The pursuit of a distinctive behavioral pattern that is
unique to Triatominae, i.e an autapomorphy, guided our current experimental
model. In this respect, we chose the genus Belminus as
an experimental model to identify an ethological feature that reveals
phylogenetic relationships.