Taxonomy is essential to biological sciences and the priority field
to be supported in face of the biodiversity crisis. The
industry of scientific publications has made extensive use of bibliometric
indexes, resulting in distortions to institutions, organizations, and researchers, such
as the side effect known as Journal Impact Factor (JIF)
mania. Inadequacies of the most widely used bibliometric indexes from
giant companies Clarivate™ (InCites™) and RELX™ Elsevier B.V. (Scopus®) to
assessment of the relevance of taxonomic publications were considered as
one of the impediments for the progress of this field.
Recently, Clarivate suppressed the mega-journal Zootaxa, focused on taxonomy, from
Journal Citation Reports (JCR), a database with 12,000 periodicals. Zootaxa
suppression, together with other 32 journals, was based on an
unusual high proportion of self-citations. Suppressed journals would thus not
receive a value of JIF for 2020. A prompt reaction
from the scientific community against the suppression of Zootaxa took
place and, accordingly, Clarivate announced its reinstatement. This situation exposed
many persistent myths and misuses of bibliometric indexes. The goal
of this study is to shed light on the impacts
of bibliometric indexes to the taxonomic field and on underlying
aspects of the suppression of Zootaxa. Our major question is
whether the suppression of any journal from JIF can really
affect the production in the taxonomic field. We explored data
metrics from the JCR (Web of Science Core Collection™) for
2010–2018 of the top ten zoological journals (eight are included
in JCR) in the number of new taxa and journals
focused on or regularly publishing taxonomic studies, totaling 123 journals.
Zootaxa shows higher levels of self-citations than similar journals. We
consider that two possible explanations provided for the high number
of self- citations, i.e., Zootaxa’s scope on taxonomy and the
fact that it is a mega-journal, are inadequate. Instead, putative
explanations are related to the “Zootaxa phenomenon,” a sociological bias
that includes visibility, and potential harmful myths that portray Zootaxa
as the unique journal that publishes taxonomic studies with an
inviting JIF value. Menaces to taxonomy as a science come
from many sources and the low bibliometric values of its
journals are only one of the factors that contribute for
establishing the so-called taxonomic impediment. We suggest rejection of bibliometric
indexes, including JIF, instead of considering them when convenient. Taxonomists
as a community, instead of being deeply focused on journal
metrics endorsing the villainy of bibliometric policies imposed by dominant
companies, should be engaged with renewed strength in actions directly
connected to the development and promotion of this science.