Belminus is able to detect thermal cues as they feed
on humans and other homoeothermic vertebrates. But, they prefer poikilothermic
arthropods as hosts (Sandoval et al. 2013), whose temperature rarely
exceeds that of warm-blood vertebrates. Wigglesworth and Gillett (1934 a,b)
suggested that triatomines are attracted to their host mainly by
warmth. Vinauger et al. (2013) stated that “heat constitutes the
only necessary and sufficient signal to trigger the PER” or
proboscis extension response (Flores and Lazzari 1996). Haridass and Ananthakrishnan
(1980) stated that “unlike predatory reduviids, in the hematophagous T.
rubrofasciata, feeding behavior is elicited only by a temperature gradient
arising from their vertebrate hosts, as is also the case
with other blood feeding insects”. In disagreement with these statements
we suggest that feeding behavior in all Triatomine subspecies is
not solely driven by heat. In line with previous studies,
visual, olfactory and tactile stimuli can also trigger the FAP
(Páez-Rondón et al. 2018). In this study we confirmed that
non-thermal stimuli from poikilothermic insects elicit positive taxis and the
FAP in Belminus species. Such elicitation flexibility of stimuli for
triggering orientation behaviors and the FAP was decisive in the
change of behavior that permitted the primitive predateous reduviids to
become kleptophagous, driving the evolution of Triatominae. Presumably, early triatomines
fed on abundant soft invertebrates in the nests and burrows
of vertebrates, then later encountered their defenseless newly born offspring,
tasted them, extended the proboscis, punctured and penetrated their skin
(Otálora-Luna et al. 2015). The peculiar form and flexibility of
triatomine proboscis appeared, the quality of their saliva became less
toxic and more analgesic, and their FAP acquired a kleptopagous
aspect (sensu Portmann 1967), thus triatomines became an advanced group
among Reduviidae. Eventually, this elicitation flexibility also facilitated the process
of domestication of several sylvatic species, like Belminus sp.