Language documentation materials are collected through significant investment of effort,
time, and financial resources; however, for speakers, these materials often
represent critical aspects of their culture, identity, and self-determination (UNDRIP,
2007; Carroll et al., 2020). It is therefore essential to
ensure that speakers have access to the documentation. Ideally, copies
of the documentation should be provided to the community from
the outset; if this is not possible, a copy should
be repatriated or returned to the community at a later
stage (Kung, 2020; Vapnarsky, 2020; R. Miller, 2021; see ยง4.3).
Depositing data in a digital archive constitutes a form of
digital repatriation (Kung, 2020), provided that communities have relatively unobstructed
access to the data. Although digital archiving is not the
sole method for repatriating data to the community of origin,
it is one effective means of sharing materials with the
community while also ensuring their preservation for future generations. However,
many Indigenous peoples and communities worldwide still lack adequate internet
access. In such cases, it is important to identify a
local, regional, or national archive, library, museum, school, governmental office,
or another accessible location where a copy of the data
can be deposited (Wilbur, 2014), in addition to depositing the
data in a broadly accessible digital repository that is better
equipped for long-term digital preservation (see below). Regardless of the
specific location of archiving, sharing and repatriating primary and secondary
data, as well as resulting publications, supports language maintenance, reclamation,
and revitalization by making materials available to speakers and their
descendants. While it is anticipated that these data may be
used for language education, maintenance, or revitalization, it is not
possible to predict the precise ways in which speakers and
their descendants will utilize the materials (for recent examples, see
Lukaniec, 2022; Spence, 2018; Vapnarsky, 2020). Nonetheless, the data embody
the languages and cultural heritage of these speakers, and they
have the right to determine how and when the materials
are used (Holton et al., 2022).