In our research area, learner language, there are few corpora
that can be accessed, for instance, the International Corpus of
Learner English (ICLE)1, the Louvain International Database of Spoken English
Interlanguage (LINDSEI)2, Louvain Corpus of Native English Essays (LOCNESS), the
Michigan Corpus of Upper-Level Student Papers (MICUSP)3 and the British
Academic Written English corpus of English texts (BAWE)4. Each of
these corpora was designed with a specific purpose. While ICLE
and LINDSEI were compiled to allow access to English learners’
interlanguage5, MICUSP and BAWE focused on high grade written papers
of different genres and LOCNESS on essays written by American
and British university students. However, there are several similarities regarding
the situational characteristics involved in the compilation of these corpora.
The participants are all students at higher education institutions. They
are authors who write or speak, either in a context
where what is produced is being assessed or not being
assessed, including or excluding time constraints. Besides the fact that
the production circumstances may vary, the addressors are students and
can be considered novice or apprentice writers.6 The main difference
among these corpora is that participants have different first language
backgrounds. After reflecting on these characteristics, a researcher may wonder
how suitable such corpora would be for their study. In
our case, our research context is a Brazilian university; consequently,
some questions would remain unanswered if our studies are limited
to these corpora. Despite the two facts that the corpora
are all quite large and that ICLEV3 has a subcorpus
of essays written by Brazilian students (Br-ICLE7), we ultimately found
them insufficient for our needs, particularly to deeply investigate linguistic
variation across text genres, across academic levels (undergraduate and graduate),
across disciplines and across proficiency levels to understand the users’
choices with cross-sectional or longitudinal data perspectives. Such aspects cannot
be fully covered with Br-ICLE data. Furthermore, making a new
corpus available to other researchers has also been one of
our goals. A CQPweb framework will soon be available for
searchers on our corpus8 with tools such as keyword search,
collocate list, with different association measures, and visualization of occurrence
dispersion.