Self-esteem is another behavior through which individuals can improve their
mood state by improving their self-confidence, increasing the chances of
taking and posting selfies. Furthermore, it is possible that selfie
sharing is associated with higher self-confidence in circumstances where careful
selfie selection has taken place, or where there is a
high chance of positive feedback (Chang et al., 2019). While
selfie posting may be associated with an improved sense of
self-esteem and confidence, it appears that in the short-to-medium term,
selfie posting may have more variable effects depending on the
feedback received (Rosenthal-von der Puetten et al., 2019). More research
is needed on the role of mood modification in selfitis,
both on the positive and negative consequences of selfie and
mood behavior. The present study showed that those who are
still in the early stages of selfitis (mild levels), scored
higher on the "mood and confidence" factor, meaning they are
more vulnerable to feeling good and confident when posting selfies.
In the same sense, those participants with moderate levels of
selfitis scored higher on the "subjective conformity" factor. This factor
explains the need to belong to the group. A need
that, often at excessive levels, makes the individual subject themselves
to anything to be accepted in an online group or
to gain a "like" (McLean et al., 2019; Rosenthal-von der
Puetten et al., 2019). Chua & Chang (2016) conducted a
study with girls in Singapore and found that the need
for acceptance by the online group was associated with self-
esteem ratings and seeking positive feedback. In the present study,
those in selfitis's moderate levels, exhibited higher need for acceptance
than in the other groups. Furthermore, it was observed that
the "subjective conformity" factor showed strong correlations with "social competition",
"attention seeking", and "mood and confidence" factors. Such data allows
us to infer that the greater the need for acceptance,
the more competition is observed (e.g., taking selfies in different
poses; posting selfies to receive more "likes"), the more attention-seeking
is observed through attempts to increase popularity by posting selfies,
and the more confident the subject feels when taking and
posting selfies.