Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, scientists and health
care workers provided information based on scientific evidence for the
general public, increasing their exposure on social and mainstream media.
Society witnessed science-in-the-making while scientists and health care workers were
dedicated to improve understanding and develop tools for the diagnosis,
treatment, prevention and control of this novel disease. This study
aims to assess the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic
on adolescents’ perception of science, scientists and health care workers;
to understand whether it changed their career choices; and to
learn about the resulting first-year applications and enrollments in scientific
and medical careers for the 2020-2021 school year in Mexico.
We conducted a voluntary national anonymous online survey and analyzed
the official database of the National Association of Universities and
Higher Education Institutions in Mexico (ANUIES) to answer these questions.
With 983 valid responses (CI 95%) we found that by
mid-2021, 9 out of 10 respondents aged 14-19 in Mexico
had a positive perception of science; that the ongoing pandemic
improved their perception of science (69%), scientists (70%) and health
care workers (72%); and that their experience during the pandemic
changed their career choices to pursue science (23%) and health
care (28%) careers. The selected main reason (40-50%) for studying
science and health care careers was “liking that type of
knowledge”; while only 3% agreed that the pandemic was the
main reason for their choice. A thorough analysis of the
official ANUIES database showed an increase in first-year applications for
scientific (22%) and health care (17%) careers for the 2020-2021
school year compared to the previous, non- pandemic 2019-2020 school
year. Enrollment was partly limited by the number of places
available. With this study we conclude that a silver lining
of the COVID-19 pandemic could be the improvement of the
perception of science, scientists and health care workers and possibly,
the creation of a new generation of scientists, medical doctors,
and health care workers. Future studies would need to investigate
the duration and further positive consequences of this pandemic effect
and to understand whether these results are consistent in other
parts of the world where adolescents experienced different public policies,
public messages and COVID-19 outcomes.