Eleven days after hospital discharge, during which the patient remained
afebrile for more than one week, he was readmitted with
a two-day history of fever, acute-onset right-sided back pain, and
respiratory discomfort. On admission, his SpO2 was 93% on room
air, improving to over 95% with 1 L/min oxygen via
nasal catheter. Physical examination revealed that he was afebrile, with
a heart rate of 113 beats per minute, blood pressure
of 136/85 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 24 breaths per
minute. Thoracic auscultation demonstrated bilaterally reduced vesicular breath sounds and
bibasilar crackles. Repeat non-contrast chest CT showed increased bilateral and
multilobar lung involvement characterized by predominantly peripheral multifocal opacities, consolidation,
new subpleural lines, and additional ground-glass opacities (Figure 1B). A
new right-sided laminar pleural effusion was also identified. Compared to
the initial CT, there was an increase in heart size
and pulmonary trunk diameter. The Wells score for pulmonary embolism
(PE) was less than 2 points. Laboratory findings included a
white blood cell count of 11,090/mm³ (neutrophils 8,320/mm³; lymphocytes 1,600/mm³;
monocytes 1,090/mm³), hemoglobin 13.9 g/dL, platelet count 296,000/mm³, serum D-dimer
2,317 ng/mL FEU (upper limit of normal, 500 ng/mL FEU),
normal troponin I (<0.16 ng/mL), C-reactive protein 5.08 mg/dL (reference
<1.00 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase 613 U/L (upper limit of normal,
480 U/L), prothrombin time 14.2 s (reference range 10.1–12.8 s),
and activated partial thromboplastin time 28.9 s (reference range 25.4–33.4
s). Repeat rRT-PCR of a nasopharyngeal swab was positive for
SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed normal cardiac function. Due
to persistent right-sided back pain on the second day of
rehospitalization, CT pulmonary angiography was performed, revealing filling defects in
subsegmental arterial branches of the posterior basal segment of the
right lower lobe, consistent with acute PE (Figure 1C and
1D). Additionally, a peripheral lung opacity with a reversed halo
sign and central lucencies, indicative of pulmonary infarction, was observed
(Figure 1E). Dual-energy CT color-coded iodine perfusion mapping demonstrated a
focal iodine defect in the posterior basal segment of the
right lower lobe corresponding to the area of pulmonary infarction
(Figure 1F). Lupus anticoagulant testing was positive. The patient was
treated with full-dose subcutaneous enoxaparin and antibiotics (azithromycin and piperacillin/tazobactam).
He exhibited clinical and laboratory improvement and was discharged in
good general condition after four days of full anticoagulation, with
rivaroxaban prescribed for continued outpatient therapy.