The volatiles emitted by cockroach feces include, in addition to
specific pheromones (Schal 1992), nitrogenous compounds such as ammonia, methylamine,
dimethylamine, and trimethylamine (Sakuma and Fukami 1990), as well as
carboxylic acids including acetic, propionic, isobutyric, butyric, isovaleric, and valeric
acid (McFarlane and Alli 1985). Many of these compounds have
been shown to elicit searching behaviors in various triatomine species
(Guerenstein and Lazzari 2009; Ortiz et al. 2011; Otálora-Luna and
Guerin 2014). Ammonia, in particular, is a known attractant for
triatomines and is released in significant quantities from both vertebrate
feces (Otálora-Luna and Guerin 2014) and cockroach feces (Mullins and
Cochran 1972). The observed avoidance of mouse waste and attraction
to cockroach feces by Belminus species suggests that these insects
are capable of recognizing both specific and general volatiles (e.g.,
ammonia, CO₂, carboxylic acids, aromatics) emitted by the excretory products
of their hosts. Although odors from vertebrate and invertebrate hosts
share several molecular components, their effects on insect behavior can
be ambivalent and are influenced by factors such as concentration,
molecular combinations, integration with other sensory modalities (e.g., visual cues),
and the physiological state of the insect. For instance, isobutyric
acid and ammonia can induce different behavioral responses in triatomines
depending on their concentration, acting as repellents and eliciting escape
responses at high concentrations, but serving as attractants at low
concentrations (Schofield 1975; Guerenstein and Guerin 2001; Otálora-Luna and Guerin
2014). The use of the same chemical to trigger different
behaviors depending on context is common in arthropods (Blum 1996).
This phenomenon may explain why the cockroach in arena 1
elicited the fixed action pattern (FAP), whereas the cockroach in
the box (arena 2) or in the bottle (arena 3)
did not. It is likely that the visual and/or physical
(tactile) presence of the cockroach was necessary, as volatiles alone
were insufficient to elicit the FAP.