Survey results for each stakeholder group were summarized using both
absolute and relative frequencies. Attitudes toward open peer review, satisfaction
with the current system, and perspectives on open access and
open data were reported as the combined frequencies of responses
indicating agreement or satisfaction (i.e., “agree” and “strongly agree,” “satisfied”
and “very satisfied,” or “better” and “much better”). To compare
stakeholder groups despite potential overlap, attitudes were further analyzed using
proportional odds logistic regression with multi-membership (Bürkner, 2018), implemented via
the brms package (Bürkner, 2017; version 2.13.5) and rstan (version
2.21.2) in R (version 4.0.2). This modeling approach accounted for
the possibility that the attitudes of authors and/or reviewers differed
from those of other participants. Estimates and their 95% uncertainty
intervals (UI) were calculated using only weakly informative prior distributions,
which are fully detailed in the analytic code (Fontenelle, 2020a)
and were preregistered (Fontenelle; Sarti, 2020b). Responses of “don’t know”
were treated as missing data and excluded from the relevant
analyses. Participants who did not complete the second main page
of the questionnaire were included in the analysis of items
from the first main page, and their missing responses on
the second page were not imputed, as this missingness was
not correlated with attitudes on the first page (Kendall’s tau
ranged from -0.08 for open peer-review manuscripts to +0.01 for
open participation). Survey participants were not weighted, except for the
exclusion of individuals not belonging to any stakeholder group. No
adjustments were required for atypical timestamps. The preregistered analysis plan
(Fontenelle; Sarti, 2020b) and the final analytical code (Fontenelle, 2020a)
are available alongside the open data (Fontenelle; Sarti, 2020c). There
were no substantial deviations from the analysis plan, except for
the correction of a misnamed variable.