Sample characteristics were displayed for the whole overall sample and
stratified according to the time spent in MVPA (≥30 minutes
vs. <30 minutes per day), and time spent in SB
(<10 hours vs. ≥10 hours per day). Descriptive data are
shown using mean (standard deviation), or median and interquartile range
(IQR) for continuous variables. Categoric variables are shown as the
total number of cases (%). The differences in the median
depressive and anxiety symptoms between MVPA or SB levels were
tested using Mann-Whitney U tests. The associations between MVPA or
SB with the prevalence of symptoms of mental health outcomes
(depressive, anxiety, or D&A) were tested with models of logistic
regressions and 95% CI. We also tested the associations across
different intensities (VPA and MPA) with prevalent depressive, anxiety, and
co-occurring D&A symptoms. First, the models were tested without adjustments
(crude). Second, the models were adjusted for age (categoric, 10-year
age band) and sex (men/women) (adjusted 1). Third, the models
were adjusted for age, sex, ethnicity (categoric), marital status (categoric),
family income (categoric), days in self-isolation (continuous), current smoking (yes/no),
current alcohol consumption (yes/no), previous diagnosis of chronic diseases (yes/no),
previous diagnosis of psychiatric disorders (yes/no), time spent sitting per
day (continuous; for MVPA, VPA and MPA models) or time
spent in MVPA (continuous; for SB models) (adjusted 2). Results
from the logistic regression analysis are presented as odds ratios
(ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). The adjusted mean differences
(AMD) in depressive and anxiety symptoms according to MVPA (≥30
minutes vs. <30 minutes per day) or SB (≥10 hours
vs. <10 hours per day) levels were calculated using analyses
of covariance (ANCOVAS), adjusting for the same variables used in
the logistic regression models. Linear regressions were performed using continuous
data for MVPA, VPA, MPA, SB, and depressive and anxiety
symptoms. Models tested for linear regressions were the same used
in logistic models. We adopted a statistical significance level at
p <0.05. The statistical analysis was performed with SPSS version
22.0 (IBM Corporation).