Predatory proxies, however, prove to be problematic. They frequently turn
out to apply to well- established journals, including top-tier titles
(Olivarez et al., 2018).2 They are used by some in
equating predatory with open access publishing more broadly, reflecting Beall’s
own outspoken opposition to open access (Beall, 2013; Krawczyk &
Kulczycki, 2021). On the other hand, efforts to directly assess
journals’ adherence to the peer-review gold standard have proved questionable
and mixed. By relying on authors’ estimation, for example, Cobey
et al. (2019) found that 83.3 percent of those publishing
in Beall-listed journals believe their work was peer-reviewed, which is
less than reassuring. More convincingly, the journalist John Bohannon submitted
a hoax paper to over 304 journals (2013). With Beall’s
list, Bohannon reports that 18 percent of the journals rejected
his fatally flawed paper (compared to 62.4 percent rejection overall),
while among the minority that accepted it were journals from
the leading publishers, Elsevier, Wolters Kluwer, and SAGE.3 Then there
are the researchers who appear to exploit predatory journals for
the increased compensation and research awards from their institutions that
follow from increased publication (Demir, 2018; Pyne, 2017;). Despite these
reasons for approaching the issue with caution, the growing sense
is that “predatory journals are a global threat,” as some
35 scholars declared in Nature (Grudniewicz et al., 2019), which
may be unduly undermining what might otherwise be a welcomed
global expansion of research.4 The scholarly publishing industry has responded
to the phenomenon with a “Think. Check. Submit.” campaign. The
campaign website advises authors “to check if [the journal] is
trusted” before submitting a paper (Think, n.d.). This means relying
on journals that “you and your colleagues know,” that are
indexed, and that belong to a trade organization like those
sponsoring this campaign. The website allows that some well-intentioned journals
are mislabeled “predatory” for want of resources, but the overall
thrust is that as “more research is being published worldwide…
many researchers have concerns about predatory publishing.” From our perspective,
at least, many researchers also have concerns about how to
facilitate a more open science through open access, open infrastructure,
and related initiatives, which is where this chapter comes into
the picture. Our three-phase study represents a response to the
question of what scholarly publishing platform developers and researchers can
do to address the combined problem of fake journals and
“predatory” mislabeling, both of which are undermining scholarly publishing. The
study works with 521 journals that are both listed as
“predatory” (by Beall and/or Cabells) and employ Open Journal Systems
(OJS), a free open source editorial management and publishing platform.
While Beall’s list remains freely available online, Cabells Predatory Reports
is only available by subscription for which, at our request,
Stanford University subscribed in 2021 ($3,500). OJS is developed by
the Public Knowledge Project (PKP) at Simon Fraser University and
Stanford University. As members of PKP and in the service
of full disclosure, we acknowledge two conflicts of interest, as
well as a sense of responsibility, that underlie our research
into these journals.