Professor Ana Leuch Lozovei was a member of the teaching
staff and taught Parasitology and Medical Entomology in the Basic
Pathology Department of the Federal University of Paraná. She contributed
significantly to the training of several generations of health, Natural
Sciences and education professionals working throughout Brazil today. Driven by
a sharp intuition, she built collections of diverse taxonomic groups,
with a view to utilizing them didactically. However, after the
years of work and contributions of her post-graduate students, the
material increasingly gained scientific dimension as the knowledge of the
areas in which she worked increased. This was how the
Culicidae section of her collection began to occupy a place
of great distinction for knowledge of entomofauna of medical importance
and of the ecological aspects of these insects in the
areas studied, with special care in identification, organisation and conservation.
These samples afforded the Basic Pathology Department the construction of
a valuable legacy that highlights the importance of the collection
to its creator and to the state of Paraná. It
reflects a life dedicated to knowledge. Professor Ana Leuch Lozovei
is now retired, but, those who meet her describe the
same sensation as that in the times when she taught
in the department: “It`s impossible to leave the classroom with
a question unanswered, always motivated to be curious”. The Professor
Ana Leuch Lozovei Collection, which has incredible growth potential thanks
to its importance, is able to serve as a reference
source for researchers interested in the culicid fauna of Paraná.
The collecting of samples aimed for knowledge of the diversity
of species and the ecological aspects of Culicidae, in addition
to specifying the species as potentially medical and veterinary in
the areas studied. But more specifically, Dr. Ana Lozovei and
her collaborators intended to map species distribution and contribute with
advances in medical entomology in the state of Paraná.