While our data are cross-sectional and directionality is unclear, previous
longitudinal14, 15, mendelian randomisation31 and randomised trials32 support the notion
that MVPA protects against and improves depressive and anxiety symptoms.
Assuming that MVPA is protective against depressive and anxiety symptoms,
these effects can be explained by some underlying mechanisms. First,
MVPA can increase the release of endocannabinoids, which has antidepressant
and anxiolytic effects33. Second, MVPA improves neuroplasticity and functions on
the brain, reflected by the increase of neurotrophic factors, such
as brain-derived neurotrophic factors (BDNF)34. The changes in BDNF levels
seem to be associated with the antidepressant effects of exercise35.
Third, evidence suggests that MVPA can fortify the anti- inflammatory
and antioxidant systems, which are increased in depressive and anxiety
disorders36. On the other hand, randomized controlled trials have demonstrated
that inducing SB increases depressive symptoms, and this effect is
partially mediated by an increase in inflammatory markers37. Fourth, there
is a large body of literature about the risks of
infection, casualties and other anxiogenic content available being consumed during
the self-isolation38, so the time spent in MVPA can also
work as a distraction when participants are focusing in the
activity, and not ruminating that specific information. Fifth, psychosocial mechanisms
including social connectivity may be key mechanisms that contribute to
the antidepressant effect of exercise. For example, those who are
more physically active may engage in more social interaction when
participating in group exercise classes as using social media/online social
interaction is associated with positive affect during the COVID-19 pandemic39.
Lastly, a body of evidence suggests that there is a
bidirectional relationship between MVPA and SB with depressive symptoms and
anxiety, so it is expected that people with depressive and
anxiety symptoms are less likely to be active and more
sedentary40.