In the current context, such thinking is behind the EU
decision to ban Russian state-owned media, in President Ursula von
der Leyen’s words, the “Kremlin’s media machine”, to stop their
“toxic and harmful disinformation” from “spread[ing] their lies to justify
Putin’s war and to sow division in our Union” (VON
DER LEYEN, 2022). “We” assume that “our” media system is
free and balanced, while that of the Other is bound
by ideology and full of propaganda. As we are so
used to our system, we lose sight of “what the
effects of being immersed in one-sided, intense and highly emotionalised
war propaganda are—effects on your thinking, your reasoning, your willingness
to endorse claims or support policies, your comfort with having
dissent either banished or inherently legitimised” (GREENWALD, 2022). It is
only possible to speak of a “new reality” from within
a posited ideal (Western) order distorted by non- Western power
and corrupting ideologies. From a non-Western perspective, “the invasion of
Ukraine does not mark some astonishing, unprecedented departure from an
‘order’ that existed mostly in the minds of Western observers
rather than the real world” (BACEVICH, 2022). This is because
international law has never been a rigid concept, but “only
exists to the extent to which the nations of the
world are willing and able to enforce it” and the
US’s narrative control power means that “international law is only
ever enforced with the approval of that empire” (C. JOHNSTONE,
2022). From the perspective of discursive struggle, then, NATO discourse
is hegemonic and thus centripetal; the US “dictates the military,
political and diplomatic framework of international relations. Other countries, including
potential rivals like Russia and China, have to operate within
that framework” (COOK, 2022), which often makes their actions visible
as actions or “escalations”, while NATO activity is generally constructed
as a (necessary) reaction. This hegemony allows NATO to shape
discourses by defining what a preventive war is, or by
euphemisms such as humanitarian war and collateral damage. To focus
on the current conflict, I will now proceed to give
a short account of the context.