Figure 1 shows the classical graphical view used to express
the results given by the “U- Multirank” (https://www.umultirank.org/). The five
Dimensions are showed in the circle: Teaching and Learning (green),
Research (pink), Knowledge Transfer (blue), International Orientation (orange) and Regional
Engagement (purple). Each Dimension is composed by the Indicators that
are showed as slices of the circle. For the Dimension
Teaching & Learning: 1- Bachelor graduation rate, 2- Masters graduation
rate, 3 - Graduating on time (bachelors), 4 - Graduating
on time (masters). For the Dimension Research: 5 - External
research income, 6 - Research publications (size-normalized), 7 - Art
related output, 8 - Citation rate, 9 - Top cited
publications, 10 - Interdisciplinary publications, 11 - Post-doc positions. For
the Dimension Knowledge Transfer: 12 - Income from private sources,
13 - Co-publications with industrial partners, 14 - Patents awarded
(size-normalized), 15 - Industry co- patents, 16 - Spin-offs, 17
- Publications cited in patents, 18 - Income from continuous
professional development. For the Dimension International Orientation: 19 - Foreign
language bachelor programmes, 20 - Foreign language master programmes, 21
- Student mobility, 22 - International academic staff, 23 -
International doctorate degrees, 24 - International joint publications. For the
Dimension Regional Engagement: 25 - Bachelor graduates working in the
region, 26 - Student internships in the region, 27 -
Regional joint publications, 28 - Income from regional sources, 29
- Master graduates working in the region. More information is
available in the Indicator book of “U- Multirank” (https://www.umultirank.org/export/sites/default/press-media/documents/Indicator- Book-2020.pdf),
including details about the calculations to obtain the grades. It
is noted that not all the 36 Indicators used in
the 2020 version of the ranking are included in the
graphical format. It is missing: Research publications (absolute numbers), Strategic
research partnerships, Professional publications, Open Access Publications, Patents awarded (absolute
numbers), Graduate companies, Regional Publications with Industrial Partners.