The Parque Nacional da Tijuca in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
is considered to be one of the world’s largest urban
forests, however no systematic inventory of its herpetofauna is available.
In the present study, we surveyed the amphibians and reptiles
of this park to assess its species composition (including secondary
data) and obtain estimates of species richness and abundance. We
conducted active searches (460 hours) between January 2013 and December
2015. We identified the taxa endemic to either the Atlantic
Forest or Rio de Janeiro state, and verified the conservation
status of each species in the international, Brazilian, and state
red lists. We also estimated the species richness and sampling
sufficiency by rarefaction curves and Bootstrap richness estimator, and analyzed
the distribution of the species abundance in Whittaker plots. We
recorded 3,288 individuals over 36 months, representing 24 species of
amphibians and 25 reptiles. The cumulative species curves, rarefaction, and
the richness estimated indicated that sampling effort was adequate. Species
abundance adjusted to the log-series model in both amphibians and
reptiles. The four most abundant amphibians represented 70% of the
individuals recorded in this group, while the two most abundant
reptiles represented 60% of the total individuals. The inclusion of
the secondary data raised the number of amphibian species to
38, and the number of reptiles to 36. Approximately 80%
of the amphibian species and 28% of the reptile species
recorded are endemic to the Atlantic Forest, and six of
the amphibian species are endemic to Rio de Janeiro state.
Six amphibian species and one reptile specie are classified under
some threat of extinction, and two reptile species were exotic.
The considerable diversity of the herpetofauna of the Parque Nacional
da Tijuca, which includes endemic and threatened species, reflects the
effectiveness of the reforestation of this protected area and emphasizes
the importance of its conservation.