The results are presented in Figure 1 and Table 1.
Comprehensive data for each database analyzed in this study are
available in the Supplementary Information (Romero & Castillo, 2020). A
total of 817,694 records associated with the term “Peru” were
identified in the Nucleotide database (Table 1). However, this figure
likely overestimates the number of Peruvian sequences, as some records,
such as those from the Spanish institution Estación Biológica de
Doñana, are included due to the building name “Pabellón del
Perú.” To maintain consistency with Norena et al. (2018), only
submissions from Peruvian institutions were considered. This approach yielded 14,488
sequences (1.77% of the “Peru”-related records) submitted by 36 Peruvian
institutions (Supplementary Information 2), with 11 institutions contributing more than
100 records each (Figure 1). The majority of records were
submitted by public institutions, including Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS),
Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos (UNMSM), Instituto Nacional de
Investigación Agraria (INIA), and Instituto de Investigaciones de la Amazonía
Peruana (IIAP), as well as private institutions such as Universidad
Peruana Cayetano Heredia (UPCH) and Farmacéuticos Veterinarios S.A.C. (FARVET). In
the BioProject database, 193 records were associated with the term
“Peru” (Supplementary Information 3), of which 59 were submitted by
9 Peruvian institutions (Figure 1). INS accounted for the largest
number of records, followed by UNMSM, Universidad Nacional Agraria La
Molina (UNALM), and UPCH. In the PATRIC database, 2,959 records
were identified (Supplementary Information 4), with 107 submitted by 8
Peruvian institutions (Figure 1), primarily UPCH, INS, and UNMSM. In
the BOLD database, 23,968 public records were associated with the
term “Peru”; of these, 8,249 were mined from GenBank and
excluded to prevent duplication. Ultimately, 3,754 records were submitted by
11 Peruvian institutions (Supplementary Information 5), with the majority originating
from the Centro de Ornitología y Biodiversidad (CORBIDI), UNMSM (mainly
from the Museo de Historia Natural), UNALM (mainly from the
Herbarium), Instituto del Mar del Perú (IMARPE), and Servicio Nacional
de Sanidad Agraria del Perú (SENASA).