Sample characteristics were presented for the overall sample and stratified
by time spent in moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA; ≥30 minutes
vs. <30 minutes per day) and sedentary behavior (SB; <10
hours vs. ≥10 hours per day). Descriptive statistics for continuous
variables are reported as mean (standard deviation) or median and
interquartile range (IQR), while categorical variables are presented as frequency
and percentage. Differences in median depressive and anxiety symptom scores
between MVPA and SB groups were assessed using Mann-Whitney U
tests. Associations between MVPA or SB and the prevalence of
depressive, anxiety, or co-occurring depressive and anxiety (D&A) symptoms were
examined using logistic regression models with 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
Additional analyses assessed associations between different intensities of physical activity
(vigorous [VPA] and moderate [MPA]) and the prevalence of depressive,
anxiety, and co-occurring D&A symptoms. Three sets of models were
estimated: unadjusted (crude), adjusted for age (10-year categories) and sex
(adjusted 1), and further adjusted for age, sex, ethnicity, marital
status, family income, days in self-isolation, current smoking status, current
alcohol consumption, previous diagnosis of chronic diseases, previous diagnosis of
psychiatric disorders, and either time spent sitting per day (for
MVPA, VPA, and MPA models) or time spent in MVPA
(for SB models) (adjusted 2). Logistic regression results are reported
as odds ratios (ORs) with 95% CIs. Adjusted mean differences
(AMD) in depressive and anxiety symptoms by MVPA and SB
categories were estimated using analyses of covariance (ANCOVA), controlling for
the same covariates as in the logistic regression models. Linear
regression analyses were conducted using continuous measures of MVPA, VPA,
MPA, SB, and depressive and anxiety symptoms, with model specifications
consistent with those used in the logistic regressions. Statistical significance
was set at p < 0.05. All analyses were performed
using SPSS version 22.0 (IBM Corporation).