The Latin American academic circuit is a constellation of national
academic communities and regional networks that was formed in the
mid-20th century with the support of inter- governmental organizations, cooperation
agencies and foundations that promoted the management of scientific information
as a key element for development. This led to the
emergence of regional institutions that collaborated closely in the cataloging
and construction of bibliographic indexes to foster the dissemination of
locally produced scientific knowledge (Rodriguez Garcia Coord. 2020). By 1967,
a significant step forward was made by the building of
information centers such as BIREME and research networks such as
CLACSO. They soon became major regional repositories for the dissemination
of Latin American scientific production (Packer, 2005; Vessuri, 1994). Efforts
to professionalize scientific publishing were driven by the creation of
indexing systems led by regional centers affiliated to United Nations
agencies (IMLA-LILACS, DOCPAL, REPIDISCA, AGRINTER-SIDALC) and by large public universities,
most notably the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (responsible for
the first indexes Clase, Periódica, and afterwards Latindex and BIBLAT).
All these systems were created and operated by universities, national
and inter-governmental organizations to improve the bibliographic exchange of the
region's scientific and technical production. With the pioneering emergence of
the regional open access journal platforms SciELO in 1998 and
Redalyc in 2005, an infrastructure supporting digitized journals and indexing
web services was born. In addition, and in conjunction with
Latindex, these services created a journal quality certification system that
focuses on peer review and best practices in editing. This
resulted in a progressive professionalization of the journals, thus establishing
an editorial hallmark in the region characterized by academic quality
and non-commercial open access. With a strong public character and
the commitment of many governments, these portals and indexing services
today represent a fundamental space for the development of open
science (Vessuri, Cetto and Guédon, 2014; Beigel 2019; Packer, 2020;
Banzato and Salatino, 2020).