Researchers who work or have worked with speakers of indigenous
languages are often in personal possession of rich documentary collections
including field notes, sound recordings, photographs, and film, which may
be stored in their offices or homes in sub-optimal or
risky conditions (e.g., damage from humidity, insects, flooding). These legacy
materials – even when they are not especially numerous –
are of high linguistic, cultural, historical, and personal value for
individuals and larger groups. For less well documented languages, legacy
materials may constitute the only early records of language use,
to say nothing of the other aspects of life that
they often capture. Unlike widely spoken languages such as Portuguese,
for which historical records are readily at hand, historical records
of many indigenous languages often persist only by way of
diligent efforts to archive legacy materials. As Austin (2017, p.
23, emphasis added) stresses, “For projects interested in documenting, describing
or revitalizing languages, especially endangered languages, historically existing materials (whether
digital or analog) like tape recordings made in earlier times
or written materials collected years or even centuries ago may
exist and may represent important sources of information, indeed, in
some cases, the only information available.” Linguists have a professional
responsibility to be aware of the existence of relevant legacy
materials, and, when possible, work toward preserving them for and
in collaboration with communities, for linguistics and related disciplines, and
for posterity generally. This allows for the subsequent philological analysis
of the documentary record, “recogniz[ing] the documentary filiation which characterizes
all linguistic data as they are successively recorded, interpreted, and
analyzed” (GODDARD, 1973, p. 727). At the same time, linguists
have a responsibility to ensure that their engagement with legacy
materials is carried out in an ethical fashion (O’MEARA and
GOOD, 2010; see also §4 above).