Language documentation materials are collected with great effort, time, and
(often) money; however, they can represent something much more profound
to the speakers: their culture, identity, and self-determination (UNDRIP, 2007;
CARROLL et al., 2020). Thus, it is extremely important to
ensure that speakers have access to the documentation. Ideally, copies
of the documentation are left in the community from the
outset, but otherwise a copy should be repatriated or returned
to the community (KUNG 2020; VAPNARSKY, 2020; R. MILLER, 2021;
see ยง4.3). Putting the data into a digital archive is
a form of digital repatriation (KUNG, 2020), assuming communities have
relatively unobstructed access to the data. While this is not
the only way that data should be repatriated to the
community of origin, it is one way to share these
materials with the community while also preserving them for future
generations of speakers. Nevertheless, it is still the case that
many indigenous peoples and communities all over the world do
not have (adequate) access to the internet. In these cases,
a local, regional, or national archive, library, museum, school, governmental
office, or some other location that is accessible to the
speaker community should be identified, and a copy of the
data should be deposited there (WILBUR, 2014) in addition to
being deposited in a more broadly accessible digital repository, which
will be better equipped to preserve the digital data for
the long term (see below). Regardless of exactly where the
data are archived, sharing and repatriating the primary and secondary
data and resulting publications supports language maintenance, reclamation, and revitalization
efforts by making materials available to speakers and their descendants.
While we would hope that the data could be used
for language education, maintenance, or revitalization efforts, it is impossible
to foresee the actual or exact uses that the speakers
and their descendants will make of the data (for recent
examples see LUKANIEC, 2022; SPENCE, 2018; and VAPNARSKY, 2020). Nevertheless,
the data contain the languages and cultural heritage of these
speakers, and they deserve the right to decide how and
when to use them (HOLTON et al., 2022).