Throughout this article, we use the term archive to refer
to a repository of materials that are saved and preserved
by an organization or institution so that they can be
reused in the present and the future. An archive can
hold analog materials, digital materials (both born digital and digitized)
or both. A digital repository is an archive of digital
materials or records, and a (digital) language archive is an
archive that specializes in linguistic cultural heritage and language materials
or data. In the field of language documentation, the most
quoted definition of an archive is from Johnson (2004, p.
142): “An archive is a trusted repository created and maintained
by an institution with a demonstrated commitment to permanence and
the long-term preservation of archived resources”. Johnson’s definition does not
mention the digital component, so we offer an updated definition
from Trevor Owens, the Head of Digital Content Management at
the US Library of Congress. This definition emphasizes the misconception
that software designed for digital asset management is the same
thing as a digital repository. From this point forward, we
use the terms archive and repository interchangeably. Owens (2018, p.
4) writes: “A repository is not a piece of software…
A repository is the sum of financial resources, hardware, staff
time, and ongoing implementation of policies and planning to ensure
long-term access to content. Any software system you use […]
to preserve and provide access to digital content is by
necessity temporary […] it likely will not last forever […]
Institutions make preservation possible” (emphasis in the original). There are
some recurring themes across these two definitions: institution, commitment, ongoing,
long-term, and preservation. We will touch on each of these
themes in this section, but the take-away here is that
you cannot simply build a digital archive and forget about
it. An archive is an ongoing commitment on the part
of the institution or organization that decides to create it.