Relocation - The plants of A. distichantha and W. cyathiformis
utilized for the relocation showed an average of 19.61 and
13.65 leaves, respectively, and showed a good phytosanitary condition. The
relocation was carried out in November 2015, during the highest
rainfall period, as recommended by Lunelli et al. (2015). For
the relocation of bromeliads as epiphytes, plants were fixed on
trees on their pitchforks or trunks regardless of the species,
as also reported by Jasper et al. (2005). The bromeliads
were relocated by properly trained fieldworkers using stairs to reach
the highest pitchforks and trunks and fixed using sisal string
onto trunks or pitchforks, to prevent falls, and transplanted on
the ground. All bromeliads were identified with numbered plastic tags.
For the terricolous relocation, the bromeliads were removed from the
pots and transplanted in the same crown projection area of
the tree crown where the epiphytes were fixed. Plants were
placed into holes made with a hoe, duly filled with
soil and compacted to make the bromeliads firm on the
ground. Thus, 30 units were relocated to soil simultaneously and
other 30 plants fixed onto tree trunks or pitchforks of
each species, totalling 60 bromeliads of each species, being therefore
60 plants of A. distichantha and 60 of W. cyathiformis.
As shown in Figure 4, Aechmea distichantha plants were simultaneously
relocated as terricolous (figure 4 a) or epiphytic (figures 4
b and c). Wittrockia cyathiformis plants were simultaneously relocated as
terricolous (figure 5 a) or epiphytic (figure 5 b). The
specimens were randomly distributed to simulate the fieldwork carried out
by technicians of companies who relocate the rescued specimens in
a simple procedure, regardless of the presence of sprouts, inflorescences
and without considering the size variation between them. Then, the
distribution of plants was not distinguished as to the reproductive
or vegetative stages. At the end of the random relocation
procedure, the distribution of A. distichantha was: 20% (12 plants)
and 21.7% (13 plants) in the epiphytic and terrestrial forms,
respectively with bromeliads in the reproductive stage. In the vegetative
stage 30% (18 plants) of bromeliads were relocated as epiphytes
and 28.3% (17 plants) as terrestrials. These percentages were calculated
from 60 bromeliads.