Biomechanical parameters - We calculated the stem bending stiffness using
a universal testing machine (MBioI, Biopdi, São Paulo, Brazil) with
a 5 N force transducer and a constant speed of
1 mm min-1, applying a three-point bending test to each
stem segment, following the protocols described by (Vincent 1990b) and
Rowe & Speck (1996). Previous analyzes showed that the shear
effect is minimized in the three-point bending test when the
span-to-depth ratio values are greater than 20 in this wood
species (Supplementary material Figure S1). Therefore, we standardized the span-to-depth
ratio to 30 to avoid the shear effect on the
measured bending, following Vincent (1990b) and Gerolamo et al. (2020).
We evaluated the displacement-force curve of each measurement interval per
sample, using software MBioI coupled to the universal testing machine.
The stem samples were placed on the two vertical supports,
with small displacement (2 mm), ensuring that the measurements would
be entirely within the elastic range of the stem to
minimize possible shear influence. The typical duration for bending tests
here was approximately five minutes. The flexural stiffness (EI; in
N mm²) of each segment was calculated using the formula
[EI = l3ß / 48], where l (mm) is the
distance between the two vertical supports and ß is the
slope (N mm-1) of the best-fitting regression of the displacement-force
curve (R2 > 0.98). We calculated the axial second moment
of area (I; in mm4) using the diameter of each
segment in three positions, in the middle and approximately 15
mm from both ends. We approximate the cross-section shape of
each segment as an ellipse using the formula [I =
πa3b / 4], where a (mm) represents the vertical radial
diameter and b (mm) the diameter perpendicular to the direction
of the applied force, respectively. Lastly, structural Young’s modulus (E;
in M Nm-2) was calculated as [EI / I] of
each sample and at each sampling time (every 4 hours),
totaling 13 measurements for each stem sample.