Stringent measures to control COVID-19 also came at an enormous
human cost. With businesses and construction sites shut across Indian
cities, migrant laborers—estimated at over 100 million people, many of
whom slept in the same premises where they worked—lacked any
social safety net and without pay could not buy food.
Many decided to make an arduous journey back home on
foot. Thousands of migrants from New Delhi walked along interstate
highways to reach their hometown hundreds of miles away, but
were beaten with batons by police only a few miles
into their journeys. On March 29, all of India’s twenty-eight
state governments (with the exception of Uttar Pradesh) followed the
federal order to seal their borders, thereby forcing migrants to
stay where they were. By late March, Modi's speeches depicted
migrant workers as “reckless” and as “virus spreaders.”33 Only in
May 2020 did the government repatriate migrant workers to their
hometowns, using the state-owned railway network. Even here, however, virus-
control policies were not implemented on the trains.34 Few passengers
were tested for coronavirus, and social distancing was virtually non-existent
in train carriages on journeys that could last days. Likewise,
the states receiving migrant workers implemented few protective measures. As
a result, the exodus of migrant workers spread the pandemic
to rural areas.35 The problems involved in ferrying migrant workers
to their hometowns were often overlooked, and at times tolerated
per the logic of some governmental authorities that such conditions
would help develop herd immunity. By June 1, 2020, the
central government released guidelines to loosen restrictions associated with inter-state
travel despite the fact that not all states had agreed
to lift restrictions. The government continued with this policy even
though by September 2020, India had the world’s largest incidence
of COVID-19 cases in absolute numbers, with 1.33 million new
cases (thereby surpassing Brazil as the country with the second
highest number of coronavirus cases after the USA).36 Regardless of
these problems, during the second half of 2020, the Indian
government claimed that thanks to the lockdown, the country had
reached victory over the virus.